-*- mode: outline; -*-

* How this all works

The basic theory of building Lispbox is to build or unpack all the
individual components (emacs, a Lisp, SLIME, etc.) from official
distributions (preferred) or sometimes from CVS sources and then knit
them together.

For each component we start from some archive of either the sources or
a binary distribution, usually a tar.gz or tar.bz2 file. We need these
archives to be named so that they unpack into a directory named the
same as the archive minus the .tar.gz, or whatever, extension. If we
want to build components from CVS sources, we use the shell script
make-distro-from-cvs.sh to make a tar.gz from the contents of a CVS
directory with the current date and time as a version number.

These archives are placed in one of two directories that you need to
create in the lispbox directory, source-archives or binary-archives.
When building a component from source the appropriate archive is
unpacked into a directory, staging, that the main makefile will create
as needed. The contents are then built and repackaged as a tar.gz in
the staging-archives directory. Binary archives are copied directly to
staging-archives. Once all the components are built, the whole Lispbox
directory structure is created and the staging-archives are unpacked
into the appropiate places in that structure. We keep the
staging-archives as compressed tarfiles to save disk space when we
have Emacs and a bunch of Common Lisp implementations all built and
ready to package.

The compents needed are:

 - Emacs. Download the source tar from FSF for Linux, the binary
   distro from FSF for Windows, and make an archive from CVS on
   savanah.gnu.org for OS X:

    cvs -z3 -d:pserver:anonymous@cvs.savannah.gnu.org:/sources/emacs co emacs

 - SLIME. Make an archive from CVS on common-lisp.net.

      To checkout from CVS you must first login to the repository:

        export CVSROOT=:pserver:anonymous@common-lisp.net:/project/slime/cvsroot
        cvs login

      Enter anonymous when prompted for the password. You can then
      check out the latest version with:

        cvs checkout slime

 - A Lisp. CLISP and SBCL can be built from source (though building
   SBCL needs a working Lisp in your path.) Allegro is built from
   binary distros (though in reality Kevin Layer at Franz does most of
   the building of Allegro Lispboxen these days). And OpenMCL is
   currently built from a binary archive.

 - The practicals code from Practical Common Lisp. Available at:

     http://www.gigamonkeys.com/book/practicals-1.0.3.tar.gz

   Even though it is just source code, it is placed in the
   binary-archives directory because it is not source we need to
   build. (It's not clear the source-archive/binary-archive
   distinction is that valuable since the details of how to
   build/unpack/whatever the archives is already encoded in the
   various per-component GNUmakefile.* files.

 - Portable aserve. Source distro available from sourceforge. Like the
   practicals source, it is considered a binary-archive for our
   purposes since we don't build it--we just unpack it in the right
   place.

* Caveats

** C Libraries

On GNU/Linux some of the components depend on libraries that I presume
are dynamically linked to the executable. Which means that the
binaries we provide won't run on boxes that don't have those libraries
installed. Here are a couple of libs I know I installed in order to
get things working on my Ubuntu Edge Eft box.

*** For emacs

libxt-dev (the X toolkit intrinsics). The non-dev libs were already
installed, by default I think, so maybe this will be fine, at least
for Ubuntu users.

*** For CLISP

libsigsegv-dev. This one should get statically linked into the CLISP
exe according to the libsigsegv web page.


** Emacs

The emacs distros version numbers are confusing. The current version
of Emacs is essentially the 21.3 version originally released 24 March
2003. However in February 2006 a bug was discovered that lead to a
serious security hole on Unix platforms which caused Stallman to
release a 21.4 release which was really just 21.3 plus a patch for
that one bug. (This caused all kinds of chaos because everyone was
expecting the long-awaited (and still waiting) Emacs release to be
21.4.) However since the bug was Unix specific the Windows binary
releases, which I use for building the Windows Lispboxen, were not
rebuilt and thus version number of the latest emacs on Windows. To
make matters worse, for reasons I don't recall, the 21.4 source
archive downloadable from the FSF is called "emacs-21.4a.tar.gz" even
though it still unpacks into a directory named "emacs-21.4". So to
prepare to build a Unix Lispbox you need to download the 21.4a archive
and rename it to "emacs-21.4.tar.gz" and set GNU_LINUX_EMACS_VERSION
to 21.4 in GNUmakefile. OS X you have to use CVS emacs (which will be
22.0 if and when it is ever released.) because 21.4 doesn't build out
of the box on OS X. (When I was originally building Lispbox in 2005 I
figured 22.0 would be released at any moment and hoped it would happen
before my book was published so I could build Lispboxen on Windows,
GNU/Linux, and OS X all using the same--and an officially
released--version of Emacs. Two years later the world is still
awaiting 22.0 and 21.3, a.k.a 21.4 is weeks away from being four-years
old.)


* Todo


- Add entries to emacs's dir file to add a Lisp in a Box section with
  the info files for SLIME and such Lisp's as have them.

- Make HTML index to HTML docs.

- Add hook to SLIME (if there isn't one) when it shuts down. Then hook
  it up to quit emacs when you quit SLIME.

- Figure out how SLIME finds ~/.swank.lisp so it can find it in the
  lispbox dir.

- Add foo to SLIME doc makefile to cleanup docs directory after
  building. And use it.

- Add OpenMCL to OS X build.

- How to find Lisps relative to Emacs? Set LISPBOX_HOME environment
  variable. Then set variables elisp variables with the names of each
  implementation.

- Implement lispbox-install-allegro-license function.

- Make .asd files automatically open in lisp-mode.

- SBCL needs SBCL_HOME set.

- CLISP works from anywhere.

- To build an installable .pkg on Emacs seems like we can take apart
  the Emacs.pkg we get by mounting the EmacsInstaller.dmg (much like
  we already do) and then messing with the contents of Emacs.app and
  packaging it back up. The only trick is that then all files,
  including SLIME and the Common Lisp implementation need to go inside
  Emacs.app (or Lispbox.app) which is maybe not as cool. Probably the
  right thing to do is to make a "metapackage". Hmmm.

- Need to do something about (require 'aserve) for non-Allegro lisps.
  Include Portable Allegro Serve in those lisps.

- *silence-mp3* in Chapter29/playlist.lisp needs to be set before
   :mp3-browser system can be loadad. Just document?

- Enhance SLIME to compile files into fasl directories like ASDF-EXTENSIONS does.

- NoEmacs Lispbox shouldn't start Lisp right away. (I.e. lispbox.el
  needs to be a bit different.)
